[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: After
decades of suppression
and criminalization that
has ruined countless lives,
some of nature's
more potent agents
are finally being vindicated.
Marijuana's active
ingredients are
being credited with reversing
everything from depression
and dementia to cancer.
Ayahuasca is in clinical
trials to treat depression.
Magic mushrooms, or
psilocybin, may finally
be taking its rightful
place as a partner
in the opening of
intelligence to all of nature,
including its potential
therapeutic use for OCD.
Simon G. Powell is
with us today to speak
about his lifelong devotion
to understanding psilocybin.
Thank you for being here.
I mean, you're just
kind of on a tear,
doing a media tear,
live TV and all this.
So take a breath,
calm your nerves.
>>SIMON G. POWELL: Yeah.
Well, thanks for
inviting me here.
It's very kind of you.
>>REGINA: Well, this
is really interesting.
It's something that's
not written about
as often as-- I've known
about your work for quite
a long time.
And because you
live in England, we
haven't been able to
get to you until now.
But it's something
that has in the past
been really struck down
as irrelevant, dangerous,
and so forth.
And as we start
looking at it, we're
thinking, like I said in a
moment ago to the camera,
all these things are
being vindicated,
because they are part
of an intelligent aspect
of our world.
>>POWELL: Yeah, well, the
interesting-- yeah, psilocybin,
these magic mushrooms,
unfortunately they're
almost like a taboo subject.
It's quite difficult
to talk about.
And there are
negative associations.
People think, oh, it's drugs
and this kind of thing.
And they are in this country.
They're classified
as Schedule 1.
So, psilocybin, this
substance I'm interested in,
is classified as
Schedule 1, which
means it's deemed to be one of
the most dangerous substances
known to man with no
medical application
and extremely harmful.
It's not true, and it needs to
be known that it's not true.
The evidence, particularly
now, the scientific evidence
is building up, and it really
needs to be rescheduled.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>POWELL: But yeah, I'm happy
to talk about it, basically
because of the experiences
I've had over the last 25 users
or so have been so
positive and so incredible
that you can't keep it bottled
up, the information about this.
Because it's a natural resource.
We suffer from nature
deficit disorder, right?
>>REGINA: Yes, right, we do.
>>POWELL: We all live
in cities, and we're
surrounded by man-made
architecture, man-made ideas,
and this kind of thing.
And we suffer from
nature deficit disorder
now and this terrible
ecological disconnection
from the rest of the planet,
the rest of the biosphere.
And we're pushing the
biosphere to breaking point.
So we need to get
back to nature,
and we need to address this
nature deficit disorder.
And the interesting thing about
psilocybin mushrooms is for me,
they're like a living symbol.
A mushroom is a
symbol of the Earth.
It comes out of the ground.
>>REGINA: Earthiest
of all its produce.
>>POWELL: Yeah, and through
psilocybin, if you're lucky,
you can have this kind of
a communion with nature.
I know of no better way
of communing with nature
and feeling great love for
the biosphere, if you like,
than with the use of--
>>REGINA: Imbibing her bounty.
>>POWELL: Yes, exactly.
And it's free.
This is the thing.
It's like it's an aspect of
the wilderness, if you like,
that's still out there.
It's a wild thing.
It's uncontrolled.
It's not a bad thing, and it's
there, and it's a resource.
And it's a resource that I
think we need to look at.
And thankfully, science,
there's a resurgence
in psychedelic science
now, and scientists
are looking into the various
therapeutic applications
of psilocybin and
how psilocybin can
be used to treat obsessive
compulsive disorder, as you
said, and addiction
and depression.
And they've used
it to great effect
to relieve anxiety in people
suffering from end-stage cancer
and this kind of thing.
So it's there.
It's a natural resource.
Is a powerful symbol.
And I'm happy to, regardless
of the negative associations,
I feel it's my duty
to talk about--
>>REGINA: But you're
a pragmatist, too.
And what I like
about-- well, one thing
is-- we were talking off camera
about this-- how in the world
were you able to stay so
coherent in your writings
while you were in the
middle of these experiences?
We will get into that.
But I want to back up
a bit, because you've
been an adventurer looking
to alter consciousness
through nature and to
understand the nature of reality
through natural substances
for quite a long time.
And I'd like to go back
to one of your more-- mm--
naive experiences when
you were quite young.
And it had to do-- we've
all heard that-- well, I've
read that nutmeg can be an
aphrodisiac, for example,
and other things as well.
So let's talk about your
early days' experience
with nutmeg just
to set the stage.
>>POWELL: If we must,
I can talk about that.
>>REGINA: It's too funny.
You've got to go there.
>>POWELL: Well, no, it
was one of the first--
as I described in a new book,
this was a long time ago
when I was a youth, and
you're exploring the world,
and you're exploring
psychoactive substances.
And I read somewhere in a book
that nutmeg was psychoactive.
And it's readily available
in the local supermarket.
The woman there
must have wondered
why we were buying lots of--
>>REGINA: You were buying
up all those little bottles.
>>POWELL: But I don't
like to remember it,
because it's such a foul taste
when you have to consumer--
it's nice sprinkled
on, a little bit--
>>REGINA: A little
on your custard.
>>POWELL: Yes, a
little hint of nutmeg.
But you try-- to
absolutely not recommended.
>>REGINA: How much were
you taking at one time,
like a tablespoon?
>>POWELL: A couple tablespoons.
And that's very
hard to get down.
And the effects were
horrible as well.
>>REGINA: Well, let's talk
about what it felt like.
>>POWELL: It's good to learn.
You have to learn, make
mistakes in life in order
to find the right path.
>>REGINA: You got
a stomach ache.
>>POWELL: We learned some
serious, nauseating lessons
in that.
>>REGINA: The question
is, did you ever get high?
>>POWELL: Yeah, well, it works.
It's psychoactive.
But it wasn't a pleasant
change in consciousness.
>>REGINA: And you
had to basically take
a bottle or two of it.
>>POWELL: A couple--
>>REGINA: Big tablespoons.
>>POWELL: Two or three
tablespoons of that.
>>REGINA: That's a
small bottle of it.
>>POWELL: But then after
that, I read about these fly
agaric mushrooms,
Amanita muscaria,
which is the red one
with the white spots you
see in all the fairytales.
I locate and pay lots of Amanita
muscaria, fly agaric mushrooms.
I never got an effect.
I tried every kind of
way to prepare them.
>>REGINA: OK, I have a question,
then, at this juncture.
I mean, because other
books have been written
by other authors on mushrooms
in Christianity and so forth
and mushroom depictions
throughout Christian artworks.
And they always depict
that particular one.
Why?
>>POWELL: I think that's
because-- whether they
are mushrooms in those
religious artworks,
whether they're mushrooms or
not is a contentious issue.
Most historians will say
they're stylized trees.
But if you do find something
that's absolutely a fly agaric
mushroom, that's because they
look the most interesting.
So that's what you
see illustrations
for fairy stories.
It's the most noticeable.
If you're familiar
with nature, and you
go for walks in the forests--
>>REGINA: Yeah, you see a little
red thing with polka dots.
>>POWELL: The most familiar,
the most striking mushroom
you will see is
undoubtedly the fly agaric,
because it lends itself
to being an artwork.
But that doesn't mean there's
some sort of secret thing going
on.
>>REGINA: So for
you, there wasn't
much to that when
you took those.
>>POWELL: No.
For me, it was the
wrong mushroom.
But then I soon learned
about psilocybin mushrooms.
And there's a very
prevalent species
in the UK called
the liberty cap.
They grow in parts
of America as well.
And yeah, as soon as I
found them, then my life--
that was it.
That was like striking
gold, alchemical gold.
>>REGINA: Now, did you
know your mushrooms well?
I mean, some people
are listening to this
in America thinking,
oh, my God, there's
so many poisonous
mushrooms out there.
Did you study quite
a bit first so you
had some knowledge
before you went out there
into Richmond Park?
>>POWELL: Remember, this is
the days before the internet.
You're talking
about the late '80s.
There was no interweb
in those days.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I mean,
did you get books, or--?
>>POWELL: So, yeah,
those days, you
have to go to find information.
>>REGINA: Go to your library.
>>POWELL: Younger people
won't understand this.
They say, use the interweb.
What's this guy talking about?
There was no internet.
So you'd find books or go to
independent bookshops, where
they'd have like a
section on psychedelics
or underground subculture stuff.
And you'd see
pictures, and there
were booklets you could buy
and identification guides
and this kind of thing.
So, yeah, I mean, I knew
what I was looking for.
I did all my research.
It took me a few years before
I found them, but seek and ye
shall find.
>>REGINA: And I mean, what's
so lovely about it, I've always
kind of admired about
mushroom hunters,
is that you're going out into
a forest on a cool and balmy
morning, moist air, fresh air.
I mean, what could be more
beautiful an experience?
>>POWELL: And even if
you don't find any,
the fresh air will do you good.
And it's a great
thing, foraging.
I love it.
Every autumn, most
autumns, I will go, usually
with a close friend.
We'll go out trekking around
Snowdonia or the Lake District,
the great wilderness, last
remaining wilderness, like Lord
of the Rings country,
really beautiful mountains
and valleys.
And I love it.
You're looking for
this-- and it's always,
when you do you find them,
it's like you're on the trail.
Ah, there's the trail.
You find them, and you're on
the trail of a heap or whatever,
and it's just a great thing.
And is a tremendous thing.
I always think it's like
you couldn't invent a more
profound, fantastic
scenario than the fact
that these mushrooms are
out there in the wilderness,
and if you look hard
enough, you can find them.
>>REGINA: We need a movie.
We need a big
Hollywood movie, right?
>>POWELL: Yeah, yeah.
Well, we've lost
touch with all that.
>>REGINA: We have.
I mean, just sounds like a
luscious experience in itself.
So now, you didn't initially
go to Snowdonia or the Lake
District.
You went to Richmond
Park in London.
>>POWELL: And Hampstead Heath.
>>REGINA: I was going to
ask you of Hampstead Heath.
That's such a beautiful park.
>>POWELL: Yeah,
they're both beautiful.
>>REGINA: They
have them as well?
>>POWELL: Yes.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
So let's say those urban parks--
you were in Richmond Park,
and you finally scored.
You found a bunch of them.
And when you first took
them, you were bold.
Had you read what a
normal dosage should be?
Or did you just have to--?
>>POWELL: Yeah, I
ascertained what
a common-- I think
I ate about 40 or so
of these fresh liberty caps.
But as I describe
in the book, it
began quite-- it
was quite scary.
>>REGINA: Yeah, let's
talk about that.
Because we're
talking about people
who-- most people watching this
may not have ever tried them.
And so we need to know what
that journey looks like.
You went bold, brave explorer.
You took 30 or 40 of them.
Now what happened?
>>POWELL: Yeah, anyone listening
who doesn't know about this
and might be wary, they
should be wary of it.
It's not like a party thing.
It's not like cocaine
or alcohol or whatever.
It's a totally different
kettle of fungus, as it were.
But yeah, I was young.
I was like 21 or
whatever, young and naive.
Maybe I thought it
would all be like-- I'd
be graced with transcendence,
and it would all be wonderful.
And no, it was very scary.
And I started to have what
would be called a "bad trip."
And it was like my mind
was full of thousands
of bickering voices.
And it was very, very chaotic.
It's like pure chaos,
and I couldn't stop it.
And it was very scary.
So I remember trying to go
to bed, and you know, you--
>>REGINA: Curl up in
the fetal position.
>>POWELL: Yeah, the
old fetal position,
which is a common
thing-- very scary.
But I was saved,
because I'd recently
been studying
Gurdjieff, and Gurdjieff
was a spiritual guru, spiritual
teacher in the 1920s and '30s.
And his teaching is based
around really mindfulness,
as all great spiritual
teachers, they're
teaching is based around
mindfulness, I think.
And so I was able to employ the
techniques that Gurdjieff wrote
about and taught his students.
And I was able to suddenly--
>>REGINA: Even in the
midst of all of that,
you were able to
remember to observe?
>>POWELL: Yes, yes.
So I saw, I suddenly
saw this, rather
than being caught up and
consumed by this inner chaos.
I stepped aside
and could see it,
and I could sort
of look around it
like it was an object
that I could study.
And the more closely
I saw that chaos,
the sort of further away it
went and the less energy it had.
And then the whole
experience turned around,
and I had a full-blown
mystical experience,
which even now I can remember.
I remember lying in bed, and
it was like this divine energy
was like flowing through me.
And I just-- tears
coming out of my eyes,
and it just felt-- I was
in touch with something
very, very powerful
and profound.
Yeah, and I knew
from that moment
there was something
worth pursuing there.
There was something
very important there.
>>REGINA: But you also learned
that in those initial stages,
if you don't know what to
expect, if any fear comes in,
anything like that,
then you're going
to go to your lower potentials.
>>POWELL: Yeah.
Well, the thing to do,
because people are always
worried about-- it's like
going on a roller coaster
ride in a way.
The way I see it is what
psilocybin and other
psychedelics do is they open
you up to your own unconscious.
And for many people,
they're disconnected
from their unconscious,
and you don't
know how-- it's like when
you go to bed at night
and you have dreams.
Let's say you have
a profound dream,
which comes from your
unconscious, some message
or whatever is in the drink.
You don't go to
bed and think, ah,
I'm going to have
lovely dreams tonight.
Or no, maybe I'll
have a sinister dream.
You can't control it.
So it's the same with psilocybin
and other psychedelics.
>>REGINA: That's a
good analogy, yeah.
>>POWELL: They make
the unconscious--
information from
>>REGINA: Manifests.
>>POWELL: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Manifests
whatever it needs to.
>>POWELL: And they
can be very tutorial.
You don't know what
you're gonna experience.
So people are
rightfully wary of that,
and they might be frightened of
that, because you're not really
in control.
The thing to do is, as Terence
McKenna used to say, really,
a bad trip is where
you're being forced
to learn more quickly than
you're accustomed to learning.
And the thing to do
is to not block out.
And the guru I mentioned in the
book, he always used to say,
whatever you're going
through, be with it.
Be with the experience.
>>REGINA: No resistance.
>>POWELL: Yeah, don't, because
if you set up resistance,
it's like putting up a door.
If you set up a door, there
will be a pounding of the door.
So don't set up a door.
Just accept it.
People can go through--
it's not all love
and light with psilocybin.
It can be challenging.
You have to work through--
unfinished business
will come into it.
And we all have
relationship problems.
The older we get, we have--
life is made of relationships,
and not all our
relationships are rosy.
There are tensions, right?
We all know.
And we don't always deal with
that, because it's easier
not to, and we carry
chips on our shoulder
and all this kind of thing.
So the thing to do is when all
this unfinished business comes
up, it can be challenging.
But just accept it, and
just go with whatever
you're being shown.
Go with it and work through it.
And you'll come out--
>>REGINA: And it
goes through quickly
If you don't resist, right?
>>POWELL: Yes, and
you can learn lessons,
and maybe it's equivalent
to a year's worth of therapy
in a single 10 minutes
of intense experience
and intense emotion.
You can work through things, and
you can have insights and such.
And that's why
psilocybin is potentially
a very powerful therapeutic
tool for therapists,
because it brings all
this stuff into the light
of consciousness.
>>REGINA: Back when,
I tried mushrooms,
psilocybin a couple of times in
California when I was younger.
And one thing first, I noticed,
is men would do like you.
They'd take 30 or 40, where
the women would say, ooh,
I think that's a
little too much.
And we'd go on the light side.
So, of course, the experiences
that I had were much lighter,
but there were common themes.
And I only did this
a couple times.
One time I did it
after a day of skiing
at the lodge in Squaw
Valley, California,
where all our friends
were, and we were
drinking psilocybin milkshakes.
They had blended them up.
And so what happened was
I wasn't able to walk.
It's like my knees
became gelatinous,
and I was sitting on this
stool, kind of like a bar stool.
That was it, for hours.
I loved everybody walking by.
I mean, it was the most
brilliant, loving experience,
but I was completely
paralyzed from the knees down.
And the same thing
happened the next time
in the Deutsches
Museum in Germany.
I got stuck on
the basement floor
where the tar reed baskets
were, never made it upstairs.
Because my knees
turned to rubber.
So--
>>POWELL: Well, it affects
people differently.
And I think there's a
genetic component to it,
how it affects you,
probably the same with all
the psychoactive substances.
But yeah, for some
people, I know
I've got a good
philosopher friend who's
basically immobile.
And he had to crawl
from-- he said
he had to crawl from
the couch to get around,
whereas I-- maybe it's
because I've done it so often.
When I'm out in nature,
I'm bounding around
with a trekking
headlamp, studying.
And went up Mount Snowden on--
>>REGINA: I know.
That was amazing.
>>POWELL: --quite a
strong dose of mushrooms.
>>REGINA: Yeah, so
you can function.
Some people can't do that.
>>POWELL: I can do stuff.
But then again, at
the height of it,
sometimes you do
have to kind of lie
down and let it wash over you.
>>REGINA: But one of the things
I was going to ask within that
is that that experience
of such intense love,
love for everything
and everybody, that's
fairly common.
If you're not having a
bad trip, I would assume.
>>POWELL: Yeah, well,
it's almost a cliche,
that love is everything.
And I don't mean we all hold
hands and sing "Kumbaya,"
>>REGINA: But it was
everything, yeah.
>>POWELL: But it is.
There's something that binds.
Because the universe is
a single, interconnected,
naturally intelligent system.
Love is somehow binding
everything together.
And you can feel that, and it
can start flowing through you,
I think, with psilocybin.
And it's important for-- I've
had experience, getting back
what I said earlier about the
difficult relationships we
have, straight
away the next day,
I've contacted someone
who-- I've said,
I know we don't talk, but
I love I love you still,
kind of thing.
I've done this a few times.
>>REGINA: Because you were
feeling all this love.
>>POWELL: Yes, because it's
very important to do that.
Because it's like we're our own
worst enemy a lot of the time,
because we bear grudges and
negative emotions of one
kind or another consume us.
But psilocybin can-- you
can break free of all that.
You really can.
>>REGINA: That makes sense.
You're creating connectivity.
Just as the fungi
connect with everything
underneath our Earth, it
creates that sense of-- love
is nothing but that sense,
really, of connectivity
to everything.
So that makes a lot
of sense that you
could heal relationships after
you just had that exploding
love experience.
>>POWELL: And
that's why people--
the word "spiritual" can
mean different things
to different people.
It's not like a
scientifically hard word.
And I often use-- for me,
the psilocybin experience
is spiritual.
And for me, that means it
is an emotional connection
to some sort of bigger,
deliberate, purposeful flow
to reality, if you like.
And you get that.
And love somehow is
bound up with all that.
So they are important things.
I don't think it's all--
it's not wishy-washy.
The psilocybin experience
is not wishy-washy.
Because it actually works.
People are interested in
the meaning of life, right?
Everyone is.
And we all explore
life in different ways.
The thing-- and Terence McKenna
used to talk about this.
The mushroom is
something tangible
that you can hold in your hand.
And you consume it.
So this is another
symbolic aspect to it.
It's like I've talked
in my "Manna" film.
I talked about consuming
the mushroom is
like consuming the truth.
And it works.
It's a real thing that
can be actively consumed.
And if you think about the
whole symbology of that,
it's-- so it works.
And it can do wonderful things.
So it's very important
to-- and it needs
to come out of the subculture.
And it needs to
be available to--
>>REGINA: Oh, we're going to
get into that and why it's not
and what is and why what is is.
But that theme that you were
just talking about of love,
I mean, ultimately you ended up
there after all these journeys.
And it's funny, the
various messengers
you wouldn't expect
from around the planet.
David Icke, one of his
books, love is all there is;
everything else is illusion,
after he went to South America
and was broken open,
so it comes from all.
I mean, when you come down to
the essence of the exploration,
that is where we end up.
And I was lucky.
I got to go there a couple
times, first times out
of the chute.
Terrence McKenna-- it's hard
to talk about psilocybin
without Terence
McKenna's name coming in.
And you actually met him
in '92 at Glastonbury
at a music festival.
>>POWELL: No, no,
I didn't meet him.
I made friends with
the shaman who worked--
>>REGINA: Oh, the shaman, OK.
>>POWELL: I did meet Terence
briefly a few days later.
>>REGINA: Yeah, talk about
that, those early days
and what McKenna was
bringing to the table.
>>POWELL: Well, for me, I went
to Glastonbury Music Festival
in 1992, and that was just
before my mushroom fever
period, as I call my
mushroom fever period.
But yeah, Terrence McKenna
had a profound role.
What Terence did was he
vindicated the psilocybin
experience.
Because he was quite a sort of
intellectual, and he's a bard.
And he told stories, and he
gave it sort of a thumbs-up
and said, look, there is
something to this experience.
And he wasn't just
sort of a hippie guy.
He was very-- a bit like Aldous
Huxley, maybe, very educated,
knew a lot of things about
a lot of different subjects.
And he gave the
thumbs-up and said,
there's something very
profound about this experience.
And he championed the
psilocybin experience.
He was a chief spokesman
for psilocybin mushroom
use in the '90s.
So I came across his
work through the shaman,
because they were
working with him.
And they did this music
track with Terence McKenna
speaking on.
And yeah, and then I read "The
Archaic Revival" and "Food
of the Gods," and, yeah,
he definitely helped.
What I've said in the
book is one difference,
is that Terence McKenna
always suggested
that you take the mushroom
in silent darkness,
close your eyes, and
experience these visions,
which is a useful technique.
And I used to do that, and
lots of people do that.
But there's another
side to the experience,
and that's what I've
explored, that's taking--
and obviously this
is a rare thing,
because you need
equipment and such,
but my preferred methodology
is to take the mushroom
in situ, out in the
wilderness around a campfire
with mushrooms picked
in the local vicinity.
>>REGINA: Connected
to all of nature.
>>POWELL: Yeah, and
that's equally as good
as this-- it depends
where you are.
I don't always do that.
>>REGINA: And your
own constitution.
If you're like me,
you wouldn't be
able to take a step
to get there, right?
>>POWELL: Yeah, right.
>>REGINA: You'd be stuck
wherever it kicks in.
>>POWELL: So take them where
you feel most comfortable,
basically.
Yeah, but so Terence McKenna
was very useful in my journey,
definitely helped
me in my journey.
>>REGINA: And he spoke
out, and you speak out.
What's interesting about this,
as we started the conversation,
it's a Schedule 1
drug, illegal drug.
>>POWELL: In the same category
as crack, cocaine, and heroin.
>>REGINA: And heroin, exactly.
>>POWELL: Can you believe that?
>>REGINA: Yeah, and
there's a difference.
And I think this is one of the
things that really bothers me,
and whether it's ayahuasca
or whether it's psilocybin,
that these are drugs that
expand awareness and expand
consciousness and exploration
into arguably other realms.
And the drugs that
they're alongside
in their illegal status
are ones that remove you
from that, that dull
the senses, that
turn you into maybe more
of an automaton almost
and also can create dangers,
truly dangerous behaviors.
I mean, we were talking about
just the notion of alcohol
alone off camera.
That's not illegal,
and what it does, how
it's trashed whole cultures.
>>POWELL: Well, you can
tell a lot about a culture
by the drugs that it
endorses and supports.
>>REGINA: In Britain,
alcohol big time.
>>POWELL: Yeah, I mean,
you've got pubs everywhere.
You've got off-licenses.
You've got adverts for alcohol,
and alcohol, which essentially
reduces consciousness.
The more you drink,
the less conscious--
>>REGINA: It's an anesthetic.
>>POWELL: Consciousness
dissolves, basically,
until you're unconscious.
And yet that is
the key substance.
That's the only--
>>REGINA: It's your
social lubricant.
>>POWELL: Yeah, it's the only
major psychoactive substance
in the UK and elsewhere that
the government, the authorities,
will say, yes,
you can have that.
You want a psychoactive?
Have alcohol, and we'll
supply it for you.
So there's something here.
>>REGINA: I mean, there's
something more insidious.
>>POWELL: There's something
wrong with a culture that
drowns itself in alcohol.
And maybe people
are deeply unhappy.
If you get heavily
into drink, it's
probably because you're
unhappy about something,
and you don't want
to face something.
So rather than face--
because the body and the mind
want to be-- just like your
body wants to heal itself
and can heal itself,
the psyche can as well.
And it will let you know through
your dreams or through moods.
And you keep coming
back to a certain issue.
But if you don't
want to face it,
and we don't have a culture
that supports facing it,
then drown it.
So it's crazy.
And interestingly, because
I'm in America now,
I noticed on the television
I've seen two adverts-- I just
briefly put the television
on, and there were two adverts
for some medical drug.
And towards the
end of the advert,
they talked about the
possible adverse side effects.
>>REGINA: Oh, you don't
have those ads in England?
>>POWELL: No, I've never
seen anything like it.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHING]
It's a joke here.
>>POWELL: Yeah,
it's like they were
proud of the possible negative
side effects to the point
where they were getting
worse-- I thought,
when are they going to
stop, these negative--?
>>REGINA: Rectal bleeding,
heart attack, possible death.
>>POWELL: Yeah, and it's
like they were selling-- this
is how bad this could be.
And it's like liver failure
was-- or your heart will stop
or you'll get a brain aneurysm.
And yet, psilocybin has
never killed anyone.
It's non-addictive.
You can't overdose on it.
It's something you'll do two or
three times a year at the most.
That's all I do now
with psilocybin.
It's not a party thing.
And yet it's that Schedule 1.
And interestingly,
Schedule 1 prescription
in America, prescription
drugs kill more people
than heroin and crack
cocaine combined.
So there's something
really-- if you
compare that with the
psilocybin situation,
it's just absolutely ridiculous.
>>REGINA: It's an
upside down lens.
>>POWELL: So it's crying
out for some sort of change.
>>REGINA: It is.
And you were a fan of the life
and times of Philip K. Dick.
Now, this kind of
feeds into it as well,
his view of how upside
down culture was
and the messaging to culture.
And just from that
alone, I mean,
that's a really large
topic, but what's
your takeaway, that
these Schedule 1
drugs include psilocybin,
where alcohol is not even
on the schedule?
>>POWELL: Well, I
sometimes draw an analogy.
This is a strange analogy
with sleep and awakening.
If you're in a dream,
and you're fast asleep,
your brain will be
keeping you in that state
through chemical
changes in your brain.
So if you're dreaming,
you're deep asleep,
and there's a noise
in the environment,
you will incorporate
that into a dream.
So your brain wants
to keep you asleep.
And so chemistry
is ruling the day.
It's almost like
that same principle
is happening in culture
at large, that there's
certain substances flowing
through the collective human
nervous system, if you like.
And the time is now ready
for that to change, I think.
And if we can get psilocybin
and ayahuasca integrated--
this is the big question.
>>REGINA: Like marijuana
becoming integrated.
>>POWELL: Yes, it needs to be
integrated in a civilized way
and allowed to flow for
people in a civilized way.
It shouldn't be
forced on anyone,
but it should be
there for-- people
should, in a civilized way, have
access to these experiences,
maybe through what I call
revitalization centers,
where you go and have
as much facilitation
as you need to have an
optimal psilocybin experience.
So it's crying out.
And I think that maybe there's
some kind of dynamic to it
and the way culture evolves.
And if you think that
culture is evolving,
there's an evolution
to consciousness,
and there's an evolution to
global human consciousness.
It can't just happen.
It's just like your
body when you grow.
You go through stages,
and you mature.
It's like a natural process.
It might be the same with
our spiritual evolution.
And so there's a natural-- so
maybe things have to be-- it's
like a dynamic.
It's almost like it's something
fictional about human history.
And there's like plot
devices, if you like.
It's almost fictional.
>>REGINA: Well, we
learn from contrast,
bumping off of things.
And you say we've reached--
>>POWELL: And then
there's waves.
If you go back to the
'60s with psychedelics,
it didn't all die.
It just sort of receded, and
now it's coming back again.
Because it will never
be boring and old hat.
You're talking about
direct experience.
>>REGINA: But you're saying it's
because people are at a point,
in your understanding,
the way you see it,
is they're at a point where
they're looking for something
substantive.
Here we have all of the glitz
and glamour thrown at us,
all the externals, all of
the ways to get cheap credit,
to buy cheap things,
and so forth,
and that we're even more
hungry than ever for substance.
>>POWELL: Well, yeah.
In the intro to the
book, I talked about
that psilocybin is a
substance with substance.
Because most other things
we buy into, it's glitzy
and it's on the outside.
And there's no substance to it.
But psilocybin is literally
a substance with substance.
And people do--
>>REGINA: And it takes courage.
>>POWELL: Well, yes.
But there shouldn't be fear.
I mean, it's worse when there's
all these taboos around it
and people aren't
talking about it
and it's kept in the subculture.
That's can keep the fear going.
But when you hear rational
conversations, and I think
we're having a
rational conversation--
and there's lots of
people, not just me.
There's other people with
voices for the virtues
of the psilocybin experience.
There's no need
to have the fear.
And we need to create
loving, positive conditions
within which you can
get these changes
and facilitate
these changes in--
>>REGINA: It has to do with
shamanic healers and ayahuasca.
>>POWELL: Yeah.
The thing is, it's
quite popular now.
If you can afford it, you
go all the way to Peru
to take part in
ayahuasca ceremonies.
And of course, psilocybin, it's
almost-- the active ingredient
in ayahuasca, the main
active ingredient is DMT.
And psilocybin is
4-hydroxy N, N DMT.
So it's almost the same as DMT.
They're very kind of similar.
So you shouldn't need to spend
thousands of dollars to go all
the way-- it should be something
that could be facilitated in--
>>REGINA: Why haven't
psilocybin mushrooms
risen a little more on that
front, alongside ayahuasca,
you think?
>>POWELL: I think the thing with
ayahuasca is it's very sexy,
the whole thing with
the Peruvian shaman--
>>REGINA: Throwing up.
>>POWELL: Yeah, Peru,
the jungle, shamans,
all the native music--
>>REGINA: Barfing. [LAUGHING]
>>POWELL: Yeah.
So I think it's just
got an allure to it.
And it's fashionable.
It's very fashionable.
There's articles and that.
Yeah, the mushroom is
always in the background.
It's this thing growing.
People don't even know.
Probably people don't know
that within a few miles away--
they might be saving money
to go to Peru to take part
in an ayahuasca
thing, not knowing
that within a few miles
of where they live,
this very similar
substance is growing.
>>REGINA: What about
the Pacific Northwest?
That's big mushroom territory.
>>POWELL: There are 200 species.
There are at least, I
think, 200, or about
or maybe more, 200 species of
psilocybin mushrooms worldwide.
And they keep
discovering new ones.
And the interesting
thing with the common one
in the UK in certain parts of
North America, the liberty cap,
is if you're at the right
place at the right time,
you can find hundreds
and hundreds.
And the Earth is packing it.
Gaia is giving it away.
As a dealer, Gaia
is second to none.
It can be difficult sometimes.
>>REGINA: But she gives freely.
>>POWELL: Yes.
The distribution can be
unpredictable, but yeah.
It's all there, and
that's the beauty of it.
And I've never paid--
I've taken psilocybin
maybe 140, 150 times,
never paid for any of it.
It's all come free.
>>REGINA: There you go.
>>POWELL: So it's an
astonishing thing.
>>REGINA: Not disrupting
culture in that sense.
>>POWELL: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: And so now,
we talked about what
happened the first time.
When you were in your
mushroom fever stage,
you were taking them quite
often and going deep.
And you started having a
completely different kind
of experience.
Let's talk about the type
of experiences you had,
say, when you were in the
Lakes District or Snowdonia,
where you were
starting to connect
on a very deep level with the
intelligence of all things.
And share with us
what that was like.
>>POWELL: Well, it
was a new discovery.
I mean, I'd never really
been trekking around the UK
before till I discovered,
literally, the Lake District.
And I saw books on it
and the pictures of it.
I thought, this
can't be in England.
This is mountains and stuff.
It was like fairytale,
Lord of the Rings kind of.
And so we went, this
guy, I'll call The Guru,
we went trekking in like 1995
and for subsequent years.
And the mushroom, the discovery
was-- I remember the first time
I trekked in the Lake District
thinking how beautiful it was.
And I was just really at home.
I just love being out
in the wilderness.
>>REGINA: I've wanted
to go there so badly,
but we always drove
right past it.
>>POWELL: I just love
being in the wilderness,
everything about it--
>>REGINA: It looks so beautiful.
>>POWELL: --when you're
away from the city
and you're back to
nature and stuff.
So I loved it.
And I remember
thinking, I wonder
if the mushroom grows here.
And I remember
thinking, it can't.
There's no way the
mushroom can grow here.
That would be too
good to be true.
It would be ridiculous
if you could
get this mushroom growing
here, the one I've
been taking in London.
And we went back there in the
autumn, and lo and behold,
they were growing everywhere.
And then to take the mushroom
in situ in an environment
like that in an oak
forest or whatever.
>>REGINA: You just pluck
the out of the ground?
>>POWELL: Yeah.
Well, yeah, I mean, it's
illegal now to do that.
Back in the day, you could
legally pick and consume.
>>REGINA: You can't
pluck them anymore?
>>POWELL: That's how
absurd the law is.
>>REGINA: Well, we'll get
to the law in a little bit.
Let just stay with
the experience.
>>POWELL: But yeah,
the experiences I
had being in a forest, I
just felt really at one
with the environment,
like I was really at home.
The campsite would be
like you're indoors.
And it was like very palatial.
So all the rocks
that you'd sit on,
you'd become familiar with
the campsite and the moths
and the individual trees.
And it was like being in a
palace, an organic palace.
And I absolutely loved it.
And then that's how this
natural intelligence paradigm
began to form in
me, which I wrote
in another book, "Darwin's
Unfinished Business,"
about this natural
intelligence paradigm.
And I just saw
directly that life,
when I was looking at plants and
trees in the sort of ecosystem,
I could see that life
was an intelligence
and the evolution was a
naturally intelligent process
for building together
all these organisms.
But that's not the
way mainstream science
will delineate
life and evolution.
Intelligence is a
word they loathe
to attribute to life, let
alone the evolution of life.
>>REGINA: Well, then
you get it crossed over
into intelligent design.
>>POWELL: Yeah, that
confuses the matter.
The natural intelligence
paradigm that I write about
shouldn't be confused
with intelligent design,
creationism, because I'm
arguing that intelligence
is intrinsic to nature, that
life itself, this, we are,
our bodies, an organism
as a network of naturally
intelligent processes.
So life itself, I argue,
is an intelligence.
So I saw all that
clearly, or felt
I saw all that clearly
through these psilocybin
experiences out
in these forests.
Yeah, then I came back, and I
tend to bang on the thing-- I
bang on about two things.
I bang on about psilocybin, that
it's something worth banging on
about, and we need to integrate
it into human culture,
and the law needs to change
and it needs to be integrated.
And I bang on about the natural
intelligence paradigm as well,
and they're sort of two
separate things, really.
But yeah, it was through
my mushroom experiences
that I saw that there was
something wrong with the way we
appraise life on Earth.
And if we appraise
life on Earth wrongly,
if we interpret
what life on Earth
is, what the
biosphere is wrongly,
and we don't appraise it in the
way it needs to be appraised,
then our relationship with
the biosphere will be wanting.
And I think that's part of
the problem we're in now,
is we don't understand
what life is,
and we don't accord
intelligence to life on Earth.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>POWELL: Things
are changing slowly
with the biomimicry movement.
Biomimicry movement are
interested in looking at nature
to solve technological problems.
How does nature do it?
How does this organism
overcome this problem
or overcome this obstacle?
Ah, we can come up with
technological solutions
by looking at how
nature, how life does it.
And the phrase they use to say
what the biomimicry movement is
is "the conscious emulation
of nature's genius."
So that's the step in
the right direction.
And I don't think it's just
a metaphor, nature's genius.
Nature is ingenious.
Our bodies are spun of it.
We've got the genetic code
inside every one of our cells,
and it's a digital--
sorry, you've
got me banging on about this.
>>REGINA: That's OK.
Band on about it.
>>POWELL: People don't know
that DNA is a digital code.
It's a quaternary
code, not binary code.
It uses four
possible nucleotides.
So the evolution of genomes,
of genes through time,
the evolution of
life through time,
is a digital information
processing process.
And that's got intelligence
written all over that.
That's the essence
of intelligence.
>>REGINA: And your
arguments start
coming up with Bruce
Lipton, "Biology of Belief."
Consciousness impacts DNA, the
direction of DNA and so forth.
And where does that
all fit in, or does it?
>>POWELL: I don't know.
That's more-- what
I'm arguing for is
I'm basically a hermeneuticist.
Well, actually I'm
a psilocybinetic
biohermeneuticist.
A psilocybinetic
biohermeneuticist--
what on Earth is that?
Hermeneutics is
about interpretation.
And hermeneutics
used to be mainly
about interpreting religious
texts according to the culture.
But hermeneutics has now spread
into different disciplines now.
And you can find books on
environmental hermeneutics
about how we interpret the
planet, the Earth, nature,
life.
And it can be reinterpreted.
Everything's down
to interpretation
at the end of the day.
Most things you
can think of have
to be interpreted in some way.
So psilocybinetic
biohermeneutics,
then, is how we interpret
life-- bio, biology.
And psilocybinetic
is interpreting
through psilocybin.
So it's about interpretation.
And so what the natural
intelligence paradigm is really
a reinterpretation of
what evolving life is.
When you get into
these things like Bruce
Lipton and conscious--
I'm steering clear of that
at the moment.
What I'm basically
interested in is
this basic premise
that evolution
through natural selection--
>>REGINA: All unfolding
through a native intelligence.
>>POWELL: --that it's
a natural intelligence
and that life and
the environment
aren't two separate things.
It's a single system
folding back on itself.
The potential for life
and the evolution of life
are encoded within that
system from the get-go.
>>REGINA: From which
we've separated ourselves.
>>POWELL: Yes, we've kind
of cocooned ourselves,
as I said earlier,
into cities, and we're
sort of going it alone.
>>REGINA: How can
that be sustainable?
>>POWELL: Well, it's
not sustainable.
And the interesting thing
with sustainability--
because that's a buzz word now.
Everyone talks about
sustainability.
Getting back to biomimicry, not
only have individual organisms
learned how to fly and
survive under water
and survive droughts and
all this kind of thing,
but ecosystems and body
sustainability-- life
has sustained itself
for 4 billion years.
So this sustainability that
everyone's going on about
is something that life
has already solved that.
So we need to
learn-- the reason I
think it's important to embrace
this natural intelligence
paradigm is we're then
more likely to look
to nature to learn and to
look for the wisdom that
is within all things.
And we don't do
that at the moment.
And I think part of the
reason we're disconnected
from the biosphere and
we're ruining the biosphere
and we're having problems
with sustainable living
and this kind of thing is
because we don't acknowledge
the wisdom and intelligence
that's within the biosphere.
We're like the prodigal
species that goes off,
does its own thing.
And eventually we'll be
called back to the fold,
and we'll find our
rightful place.
>>REGINA: Well, we can't
find anything of substance
unless we do go there.
And because the rest are
artificial constructs that
have been manufactured and
we have given our consent
to choose this as a way of life.
That's our fault
for buying into it.
Not that we're not being well
manipulated, but nonetheless,
it's a choice to
move away from that.
>>POWELL: Well, we're at a
very important critical time
of human culture.
Business as usual cannot
go on indefinitely.
We need a paradigm shift in how
we see the-- the biosphere is
a very important thing.
It's a word that
people don't use a lot.
They might talk about Gaia.
Gaia, or the biosphere,
is very important
to realize that we're
part of this naturally
intelligent whole.
There's all the information
within that whole
to heal itself and
for humans to have
a happy, sustainable
future, where
we share the great wealth
that's on the Earth.
It's all there.
It's all been given.
It's a providence.
So it's attitudes need to
change and relationships.
It gets down to
relationships again.
The human race, I would argue--
this is just my opinion--
has an unhealthy relationship
to the rest of the web of life.
And that's evinced through our
paradigms of life and the fact
that we don't
accord intelligence
to evolution and
to the biosphere.
And so that's what
needs to change.
So my drive in
life is to promote
this natural
intelligence paradigm.
>>REGINA: OK, and
toward that end,
there's something else
here that you experienced?
And you experienced it on
more than one occasion,
that you call "the sacred,
psilocybinetic pattern."
And where it first
started was on a lamp.
[LAUGHS] And then what is this?
And what was your
discovery through this?
>>POWELL: I don't
know what it is.
And I took mushrooms
about four weeks ago,
and it's an ongoing study.
>>REGINA: I quoted out of your
book what you said it was,
but we don't know what
that means exactly.
>>POWELL: Well,
there's a tendency--
I think most people
on psilocybin
will experience patterns.
Patterns are interesting.
If everything is interconnected,
and you perceive it directly,
you're going to see
patterns to things.
So that's not unusual.
People see patterns.
But I started noticing a
particular, specific kind
of pattern.
And it was objective.
It was real.
And it was on the
surface of everything.
And in the book, I come up
with two or three theories.
I thought they're quite
good theories to account--
>>REGINA: OK, I'm going to
tell you what you called it,
just so people know what
we're talking about here,
"a membranous pattern of
interrelated information
that covers everything."
Now, that's very
vague but profound.
>>POWELL: Yeah.
The best way I
could describe it,
it's like seeing an embroidered
membrane covering everything.
And what it was made of,
that embroidered membrane,
was the usual surface of things.
It's not like it was
something extra I was seeing.
There's like a pattern
that I was seeing.
It felt like I was
seeing a pattern that's
covering everything that
you can't normally see.
And I like to think of
it as like the hallmark
of interconnectedness.
It just shows that
everything is interconnected.
But it's something I'm-- three
people have contacted me since
the book came out to say they've
experienced the same thing.
So it's like an ongoing-- it's
just something I'm curious in.
>>REGINA: Fields of information
that connect everything?
>>POWELL: Yes.
And it's like it can be directly
perceived as a pattern, almost
like reality is like a fractal.
Because if you
look at a fractal,
it's a beautiful pattern.
You can go into it.
There's loads of
details and spirals
and filigree and all
this kind of thing.
And it's all one pattern.
So I think with
psilocybin, it's like you
can see your environment
as being very fractal-like
and part of a single,
interconnected pattern.
And it can be very
awesome and inspiring when
you perceive that directly.
And I often think it's got a
sacred quality to it as well,
and there's some sort of--
>>REGINA: Well,
it's fascinating.
I mean, of course,
unless you experience it,
it's kind of difficult
to see or imagine
exactly what you're
looking at, but I
can understand it conceptually.
And I thought it was profound.
>>POWELL: Yeah, well, it remains
to be seen whether it's just
me, just a few people,
or it's something
that other people can divine.
>>REGINA: It starts coming up.
>>POWELL: It's very mysterious.
Nobody knows what the
psilocybin experience
and these mystical states
of consciousness-- we
don't even know what
consciousness is, really.
So it's mysterious.
And it would be
ridiculous to pretend
to claim that you knew
what was going on.
So it's just a mystery.
And sometimes the very
feeling of a mystery
is the most important thing,
because many people don't sense
the mystery of being anymore.
So it's a good thing to
just feel directly and sense
this great mystery.
>>REGINA: And it may be beyond
the mental comprehension
and in addition,
more fine than that.
>>POWELL: Yeah, but
it's enough just
to feel that
mystery, that there's
a mystery with a
capital M. And that's
a great thing to feel that.
>>REGINA: So in
defense of mushrooms,
you've taken it all the
way to the House of Lords.
And you wrote "The
Powell Report."
Is that what it was called?
>>POWELL: Yeah, "The Powell
Report" was a document, yeah.
>>REGINA: "The Powell Report"
that you wrote and submitted--
what was your hope as to
what would come out of that?
And then what actually
came out of that?
You petitioned the British
government to say, look--
>>POWELL: Well, I was
clutching at straws.
No way I was going
to have any effect.
I did get mentioned in the
Hansard Records, or the written
verbatim records of the talks.
>>REGINA: Simon G. Powell.
>>POWELL: It was in there.
Well, no, "The Powell
Report" was mentioned twice
in the verbatim records.
But no, what
happened was in 2005,
the UK government wanted to--
because there was a trade
in tropical
psilocybin mushrooms--
it was all over the
UK, and government--
>>REGINA: There were
being cultivated, right?
>>POWELL: Cultivated
in the Netherlands,
I think, and being
sold everywhere.
And rather than looking
into the impact-- I mean,
a sensible reaction
to that would
be to look at what's the effects
of that or hospitalizations,
people driven-- what's
the effects of this?
This has been going
on for two years.
Of course, they don't.
They just knee-jerk.
And so they wanted to stop this
commercial sale of psilocybin
mushrooms.
And so they drew
up this new bill.
And that mean that the
wild mushroom would also
become illegal to possess.
And that irked me,
because that had
been unprecedented to
make a natural part
of the British
landscape illegal.
I mean, these mushrooms grow
on land owned by the queen.
You can find them in
all the parks and stuff.
So to prohibit the possession
of a piece of natural fabric,
it's insane.
That literally to
me is psychotic
that you could have
something coming out of--
if you believe in God,
then God put them there,
the idea that you can look
at this mushroom, touch it,
but if you pick it,
suddenly you could
get seven years in prison.
It's absolutely insane that
we're that disconnected.
Anyway, so it irked me,
and I thought, well,
I've got to do something.
This is going through
Parliament and all that,
and I don't want to be
looking over my shoulder
when I'm picking mushrooms
out in Snowdonia or whatever.
So I sent some
information, because they
didn't know anything.
They make all these
changes to legislation
without consulting any
scientist whatsoever.
So I managed to get
some written statements
from some scientists I'm
seeing tomorrow, actually,
some Heffter Research
Institute scientists who
do psilocybin research.
Got them to talk about
psilocybin and Rick Doblin
from MAPS.
And I got all this
information just
to inform these
rather naive sort
of granny-like, finger-wagging
nannies in Parliament.
But they shouldn't
just blanket prohibit.
You need to control it
and license it and control
licensing and distribution
and that kind of thing.
But at least look into it
and take scientific evidence.
You can't just, oh,
we don't like that,
make it Class A. There's got
to be scientific evidence.
And the scien-- all
the scientific evidence
shows that psilocybin,
it might be strong,
but nobody dies from it.
And as long as you're
healthy, it's OK.
>>REGINA: Whereas you
have some stats here.
One in 25 deaths globally
are alcohol-related.
>>POWELL: Yeah, yeah.
So it's relatively
safe, psilocybin.
People confuse
strength with danger.
It's strong.
It's not dangerous.
It's a strong substance.
So there's a lot of
misinformation and ignorance
about it.
Any anyway, so yeah, I
petitioned the government,
and I sent this
report to everyone.
But it made no difference.
And now the fresh indigenous
psilocybin mushroom
is now in the UK as a Class A.
It's equivalent to Schedule 1.
So it's a ridiculous thing.
And like I say, that's
nature deficit disorder
in the extreme.
>>REGINA: Yes, it is.
But maybe as science
starts looking
at the various properties and
the applications, that will
ultimately change, you think?
>>POWELL: It has to.
I'm going to be interviewing
some people from the Heffter
Research Institute tomorrow.
And the research they're
doing, the papers
they've had published, they've
had peer-reviewed articles
published.
A lot of the research is
going on at Johns Hopkins.
So it's a respectable
university.
And they've been good
results, and there
are various ways
in which psilocybin
is being used in a
therapeutic-- and so I think
the aim is the more papers, the
more research they come up with
and the more data
they have at hand,
then the authorities will
have no choice, really,
but to reschedule psilocybin
in the light of that data.
Because you have to.
You can't just ignore it
forever, same with cannabis,
I suppose.
Isn't it legal now in--?
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's legal.
You can go down the
street into a store
and pick some up
here in Colorado.
>>POWELL: Yeah, that would
have been unthinkable 10,
20 years ago.
>>REGINA: I think about
that every now and then,
of some pork guy who was
bringing hashish or cannabis
or something through, say,
Turkey, whose life is wasting
away in a prison cell
while people over here
can go down to the corner
store and pick it up now.
How sad that is that?
>>POWELL: It's just a
crazy-- the way humans
deal with psychoactive
substances
is a very curious thing.
It's very curious.
>>REGINA: There's
fear around it.
There's fear and control.
>>POWELL: Of certain substances.
Other ones that would have
a long tradition of use,
like alcohol,
tobacco, no problem.
But new, exotic things,
particularly if they facilitate
states of consciousness that
are unusual and different
to our normal states
of consciousness--
>>REGINA: Mind-expanding.
>>POWELL: Yes.
There's a fear of anything
new and of the unknown.
Again, it gets back to
when you take psilocybin,
I think it's the
human unconscious that
comes into conscious awareness.
And that's like a
stranger to most people.
And we're afraid of it.
And we want to keep
that like Pandora's box.
We've got to be
afraid of ourselves.
We don't want self-knowledge.
Keep it back there.
>>REGINA: Well, we just
have a couple minutes left.
And I have a couple
questions left for you.
One is, after
having done, as you
say, 140 or 150 different
psilocybin journeys
and experiences and experiencing
the great interconnected
and web and richness of life and
beautiful places in the world,
how does it work for you
just then coming back
into the rather mundane world?
>>POWELL: Yeah,
it's very difficult,
particularly we
used to have chats
about this around the campfire
when we were coming down
from a mushroom voyage.
And then we'd be looking at the
Milky Way thinking about love
is the key and
everyone's got to know
about this potential, the
way that that communion
you can have with the universe,
the cosmos and the wonder
and the awe and the
thankfulness for being alive
and that huge providence
that we're part of.
You think, we've
go to share this,
and everyone will have
to down their weapons.
You can't have this
business as usual anymore.
And then we'd be thinking
about we have to go back
to London and, oh, no!
>>REGINA: Gotta get on the tube,
gotta go to work the next day.
>>POWELL: Polluted,
back to the city,
where you're worried about
paying your bills and all that.
Yeah, it's very
difficult to integrate.
And so the real challenge
is to integrate.
And that's the period
of my life I'm in now,
is just trying to integrate
all this stuff and the lessons
that I've learned.
>>REGINA: That's my
last and final question.
What is the most profound
message or lesson
you've learned from psilocybin?
>>POWELL: Well, I
have to be honest.
It would be nice to say love
is the key, because that is one
thing I've learned many times.
But the main thing I've got from
it is this-- my raison d'etre,
I think, my function,
is to provide
this natural intelligence
paradigm to try to create,
to facilitate a better
relationship between humanity
and the rest of the biosphere.
Because I think, like I said
earlier, our relationship,
the way we see the biosphere is
all skewed and it's all wrong.
And we have to see the life
on Earth in the right way,
and we have to acknowledge
that life is an intelligence.
So the greatest
lesson I've learned
is that natural
intelligence paradigm.
That's what I feel is
my job to promote that.
>>REGINA: Well, and you
do a beautiful job of it.
Your writing is
really very coherent,
considering the state you were
in while you wrote a lot of it,
and also very humorous
and self-effacing.
You've done a lovely job.
And I was kind of bummed
out, because sometime earlier
this year, I had
this experience where
a friend who is into
essential oils said, hey,
have you ever tried this one?
Put it right here-- palo santo.
So I put it there, not
know anything about it.
I hadn't even looked
up what it was.
Well, it's a root.
And that, within minutes,
took me down into the Earth
to the roots into
the world of fungi.
And the messages
that came out of that
were amazing, about
transmuting certain energies
between the human species
and the other species.
And then I lost it,
because I didn't
know how to file it in
my computer properly.
But I was excited
to meet with you,
because that was such
a profound feeling
and experience at that time.
>>POWELL: But it's
very difficult,
those entries in the
book from my diary
while I was writing
directly under the influence
of psilocybin.
Like I said in the book,
it's like taking a chisel
and trying to-- it was
very, very difficult.
>>REGINA: You did a great job.
>>POWELL: But I
found I could do it,
and I've still got the
original journals at home.
And the amount of exclamation
marks that are everywhere--
>>REGINA: [LAUGHING] Yeah, you
edit it a bit for the book.
Anyway, I want to thank you.
I know you're a little bit
shy of media and all this.
And I want to thank
you for taking the time
and coming and
sharing this message.
>>POWELL: I've
enjoyed it, so thanks
for having me on your show.
>>REGINA: Thank you,
Simon G. Powell.
>>POWELL: Thank you.
>>REGINA: No dropping
our Gs, right?
To learn more about the
musings and implications
of using magic
mushrooms, you can
purchase a copy of "Magic
Mushroom Explorer, Psilocybin
and the Awakening Earth"
at major booksellers.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[THEME MUSIC]